Early diagnosis of phenylketonuria, a cause of mental retardation, is important because it is treatable by dietary means. Features other than mental retardation in untreated patients include a 'mousy' odor; light pigmentation; peculiarities of gait, stance, and sitting posture; eczema; and epilepsy (Paine, 1957). Kawashima et al. (1988) suggested that cataracts and brain calcification may be frequently overlooked manifestations of classic untreated PKU. Brain calcification has been reported in dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) deficiency (261630). Pitt and O'Day (1991) found only 3 persons with cataracts among 46 adults, aged 28 to 71 years, with untreated PKU. They concluded that PKU is not a cause of cataracts. Levy et al. (1970) screened the serum of 280,919 'normal' teenagers and adults whose blood had been submitted for syphilis testing. Only 3 adults with the biochemical findings of PKU were found. Each was mentally subnormal. Normal mentality is very rare among patients with phenylketonuria who have not received dietary therapy.

Evidence of heterogeneity in phenylketonuria was presented by Auerbach et al. (1967) and by Woolf et al. (1968).

Coskun et al. (1990) observed scleroderma in 2 infants with PKU. Improvement in the skin lesions after commencement of a low phenylalanine diet supported the possibility of a causal relationship.

Widespread screening of neonates for phenylketonuria brought to light a class of patients with a disorder of phenylalanine metabolism milder than that in PKU. These patients show serum phenylalanine concentrations well below those in PKU, but still several times the normal. PKU and hyperphenylalaninemia breed true in families (Kaufman et al., 1975), each behaving as an autosomal recessive. Kaufman et al. (1975) studied liver biopsies from patients with HPA and their parents. The patients with HPA had levels of phenylalanine hydroxylase about 5% of normal.

Burgard et al. (1996) found that all patients but one who had predicted in vitro residual enzyme activity greater than 20% had mild PKU, while those with predicted in vitro residual enzyme activity less than 20% were identified as having classical PKU. The authors stated that 'the difficulties of some patients to adjust their blood Phe level according to their target value although they comply with the dietary recommendations might be caused by low residual enzyme activity.' In addition, when considering the R261Q (612349.0006) mutation (a mutation with a considerable amount of residual enzyme activity, which produced higher Phe levels than expected), they hypothesized a negative intraallelic complementation effect as an explanation for higher than expected diagnostic Phe values.

Mildly depressed IQ is common in treated PKU. Griffiths et al. (2000) analyzed IQ scores collected from 57 British children with early-treated classic PKU using variants of the Wechsler intelligence scale for children (WISC) in relation to indicators of dietary control such as serum phenylalanine levels and socioeconomic factors. The authors found that, after correcting for socioeconomic status, phenylalanine control at age 2 was predictive of overall IQ, although early and continuous treatment did not necessarily lead to normalization of overall IQ. Subscale analysis revealed normalized verbal IQ in those children with phenylalanine levels of less than 360 micromol/l during infancy (the recommended UK upper limit), but performance IQ remained depressed.

Weglage et al. (2000) compared 42 PKU patients, aged 10 to 18 years, with 42 diabetic patients matched for sex, age, and socioeconomic status. Patients' groups were compared with a control sample of healthy controls (2,900 individuals) from an epidemiologic study. The Child Behavior Check List, IQ tests, and monitoring of blood phenylalanine concentrations and HBA1 concentrations were used. Weglage et al. (2000) found that internalizing problems such as depressive mood, anxiety, physical complaints, or social isolation were significantly elevated in both PKU and diabetic patients, whereas externalizing problems were not. The 2 patient groups did not differ significantly either in the degree or in the pattern of their psychologic profile.

In a retrospective study from birth in 13 patients with classic PKU, Barat et al. (2002) found greater variation of phenylalanine levels and a higher mean of cumulative variations in the 8 osteopenic patients than in 5 nonosteopenic patients. Barat et al. (2002) suggested that serum phenylalanine variations may contribute to osteopenia in patients with classic PKU.

Crujeiras et al. (2015) conducted a cross-sectional observational multicenter study that included 156 patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. Prealbumin was reduced in 34.6% of patients (74% with PKU phenotype and 94% below 18 years old), showing an adequate adherence to diet in nearly all patients (96.3%). Selenium was diminished in 25% of patients (95% with PKU phenotype), and 25-OHD in 14%. Surprisingly, folic acid levels were increased in 39% of patients, 66% with classic PKU. Phosphorus and B12 levels were diminished only in patients with low adherence to diet.

Maternal Phenylketonuria

The occurrence of mental retardation in the offspring of homozygous mothers is an example of a genetic disease based on the genotype of the mother. Kerr et al. (1968) demonstrated 'fetal PKU' by administering large amounts of phenylalanine to mother monkeys. The offspring had reduced learning ability. They pointed out that the damage is aggravated by the normal placental process which functions to maintain higher levels of amino acids in the fetus than in the mother. Huntley and Stevenson (1969) and Hanley et al. (1987) reviewed the subject of PKU embryofetopathy, also known as the maternal PKU syndrome.

Huntley and Stevenson (1969) described 2 sisters with PKU who had a total of 28 pregnancies. Sixteen ended in spontaneous first-trimester abortion. The fetus in each of the 12 pregnancies carried to term had intrauterine growth retardation and microcephaly and 9 of the 12 term infants had cardiac malformations as well.

Superti-Furga et al. (1991) reported the maternal PKU syndrome in cousins, caused by mild unrecognized PKU in their mothers, who were homozygous for the arg261-to-gln mutation (612349.0006).

Usha et al. (1992) found 3 children with PKU embryofetopathy among the offspring of a Bedouin woman who was not recognized to have PKU until the birth of the third affected child. She had an apparently normal phenotype except for pigment dilution of the hair, which was more lightly colored than expected for the family and ethnic norms. She was not mentally retarded. One of the affected offspring had died of congenital heart disease at the age of 4 months.

Fisch et al. (1993) suggested that surrogate motherhood should be recommended as alternative management of PKU in women who wish to have children, i.e., in vitro fertilization using the parental gametes, followed by implantation of the pre-embryo in a surrogate mother.

Levy et al. (1996) compared MRI results of 5 children (age range: 8 months to 17 years) whose mothers had classic PKU and were not under metabolic control (plasma phenylalanine = 1,260 micromoles per liter) during at least the first 2 trimesters of pregnancy to MRI results of 2 sibs aged 9 and 11 years whose mother had classic PKU but whose plasma phenylalanine levels were generally below 360 micromoles per liter during both pregnancies. The MRI results showed a tendency for corpus callosum hypoplasia in those children whose mothers were not in metabolic control during their pregnancies. All children studied (even those with mothers in metabolic control) displayed some residual developmental/behavioral effects such as hyperactivity.

Rouse et al. (1997) reported a collaborative study of maternal PKU offspring. The cohort of offspring were examined for malformations, including congenital heart disease, craniofacial abnormalities, microcephaly, intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, other major and minor defects, and early abnormal urologic signs. The mothers were grouped according to their mean phenylalanine levels during critical gestational weeks and average for phenylalanine exposure throughout the pregnancy. The frequency of congenital abnormalities increased with increasing maternal phenylalanine levels. Significant relationships included average phenylalanine levels at weeks 0 to 8 with congenital heart disease (P = 0.001); average phenylalanine at weeks 8 to 12 with brain, fetal, and postnatal growth retardation, broad nasal bridge, and anteverted nares; and average phenylalanine exposure during the entire pregnancy with neurologic signs. Although 14% of infants had congenital heart disease, none of the congenital heart disease occurred at the lower range of the maternal phenylalanine levels. At the lowest levels of phenylalanine, there were 3 infants (6%) with microcephaly, 2 (4%) with postnatal growth, and none with intrauterine growth retardation, in contrast to 85%, 51%, and 26%, respectively, with phenylalanine levels in the highest range. These data supported the concept that women with PKU should begin a low phenylalanine diet to achieve phenylalanine levels of less than 360 micromole/liter prior to conception and maintain this throughout the pregnancy.

Waisbren et al. (2000) studied 149 children of women with PKU and 33 children of women with mild hyperphenylalaninemia at 4 years of age. Children were stratified by the timing of maternal metabolic control at 0 to 10 weeks', 10 to 20 weeks', or after 20 weeks' gestation. Scores of a General Cognitive Index decreased as weeks to maternal metabolic control increased. Offspring of women who had metabolic control prior to pregnancy had a mean score of 99. Forty-seven percent of offspring whose mothers did not have metabolic control by 20 weeks' gestation had a General Cognitive Index score 2 standard deviations below the norm. Overall, 30% of children born to mothers with PKU had social and behavioral problems.

Rouse et al. (2000) studied a cohort of 354 women with PKU, followed up weekly with diet records, blood phenylalanine levels, and sonograms obtained at 18 to 20 and 32 weeks' gestation. At birth, 413 offspring were examined; they were followed up at 3 months, 6 months, and then annually. Bayley Mental Developmental Index and Psychomotor Developmental Index tests were given at 1 and 2 years. Congenital heart defects were found in 31 offspring; of these, 17 also had microcephaly. Mean phenylalanine levels at 4 to 8 weeks' gestation predicted congenital heart defects (P less than 0.0001). An infant with a congenital heart defect had a 3-fold risk of having microcephaly when the mother had higher phenylalanine levels. No direct relationship to the specific PAH mutation was found. None of the women whose offspring had congenital heart defects had blood phenylalanine levels in control during the first 8 weeks of gestation. Rouse et al. (2000) concluded that women with PKU need to be well controlled on a low phenylalanine diet before conception and throughout pregnancy.

Levy et al. (2001) reported on 416 offspring from 412 maternal PKU pregnancies that produced live births and compared them to 100 offspring from 99 control pregnancies. Thirty-four of the 235 offspring (14%; 95% confidence interval, 10.2 to 19.6%) from pregnancies in maternal PKU patients with a basal phenylalanine level of greater than 900 micromolar and not in metabolic control (defined as phenylalanine level less than or equal to 600 micromolar) by the eighth gestational week had congenital heart disease compared with 1 control offspring with congenital heart disease. One of the children among 50 from mothers with non-PKU mild hyperphenylalaninemia also had congenital heart disease. Coarctation of the aorta and hypoplastic left heart syndrome were overrepresented.