Dietary Treatment

Phenylketonuria is treatable by a low phenylalanine diet. In treated patients, severe white matter abnormalities are predominantly associated with blood phenylalanine levels above 15 mg per deciliter (Thompson et al., 1993). Ullrich et al. (1994) performed MRI on 15 adolescents with good dietary control (phenylalanine levels below 10 mg per deciliter). Ten of these patients had a normal cranial MRI whereas 4 showed mild changes of the signal intensity of the white matter on T2-weighted images confined to the parietooccipital region. The affected and unaffected patients could not be distinguished by age, sex, or mean blood phenylalanine concentrations. 

From studies in 4 women, Rohr et al. (1987) concluded that fetal damage from maternal PKU can be largely and perhaps entirely prevented by dietary therapy, but that therapy must begin before conception for the best chance of a normal infant. Drogari et al. (1987) presented evidence suggesting that only a diet restricting phenylalanine intake started before conception is likely to prevent fetal damage. 

In a report of preliminary results from the North American Maternal PKU Study, Hanley et al. (1996) suggested that early and adequate dietary treatment during pregnancy may provide some protection to the fetus for later intellectual development. The German Maternal PKU Study had followed 43 pregnancies (Cipcic-Schmidt et al., 1996). For minimizing risks of ill effects, preconceptional dietary control was strongly recommended. 

Brenton and Lilburn (1996) reported that by November 1994, 39 pregnancies had been completed in PKU mothers. Dietary control was post-conception in 6; 2 of these offspring died of congenital heart disease and another needed surgery for coarctation. There were no heart defects in the 34 offspring of the 33 pregnancies following preconception diet controlled by Guthrie assays of maternal Phe 3 times weekly. Excessively high and low values occurred intermittently in many pregnancies, both of which may adversely affect the fetus. 

A multicenter follow-up study (Holtzman et al., 1986) presented evidence that treatment of PKU should be continued beyond age 8 years. 

Weglage et al. (1999) reported results of testing of IQ, fine motor abilities, and sustained and selective attention in 10 boys and 10 girls with early-treated phenylketonuria and 20 healthy controls matched for age, sex, and IQ; the individuals were tested twice, at mean ages of 11 and 14 years. At the first test, examination showed significant blood phenylalanine-correlated neuropsychologic deficits in PKU patients. In spite of raised blood phenylalanine concentrations during the following 3 years, the repeated measurements revealed a significant decrease in patients' deficits compared to controls. Clinical-neurologic status of patients and controls was normal at both test times. The results indicated decreased vulnerability of PKU patients with respect to their neuropsychologic functioning against elevated phenylalanine levels on aging. 

Greeves et al. (2000) examined the effect of diet relaxation after the age of 8 years in 125 children from Northern Ireland with PKU or non-PKU hyperphenylalaninemia, correlating verbal, performance, and overall IQ at ages 8, 14, and 18 with the predicted residual enzyme activity conferred by their genotype. Multiple regression analysis demonstrated a significant reduction in verbal and overall IQ between the ages of 8 and 14 or 18, with a greater reduction in those with a lower predicted residual enzyme activity. This study also showed that patients with residual enzyme activities of 25% or more were more likely to maintain or gain IQ points after dietary relaxation than those patients with lower enzyme activities. These data suggested that continued dietary control in this latter group, as defined by genotype, may prove beneficial. 

Recognizing that a low phenylalanine diet is also low in the long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) necessary for cell membrane formation and normal brain and visual development, Agostoni et al. (2000) examined the effects of a 12-month supplementation of LCPUFA on fatty acid composition of erythrocyte lipids and visual evoked potentials in children with well-controlled PKU. The children who received supplementation showed a significant increase in docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) levels of erythrocyte lipids and improved visual function, as measured by a decreased P100 wave latency. 

Huijbregts et al. (2002) sought to answer whether there is an effect of dietary interventions that induce relatively small changes in phenylalanine concentration on neuropsychologic outcome of early and continuously treated PKU patients and whether there are differences in effect for PKU children versus adolescents. Huijbregts et al. (2002) sought short-term dietary intervention of 1 to 2 weeks and compared this for patients whose phenylalanine concentrations increased versus those whose phenylalanine concentrations decreased. Huijbregts et al. (2002) found that relatively small fluctuations in phenylalanine concentration influenced neuropsychologic task performance of PKU patients. Patients whose phenylalanine concentrations had decreased by the second assessment showed generally more improvement than controls. Patients whose phenylalanine concentrations had increased showed minimal improvement or deterioration of task performance. The strongest effects were observed when sustained attention and manipulation of working memory content were required. 

Koch et al. (2002) reported the follow-up studies of 125 children who were a part of the original cohort for short-term versus long-term treatment of PKU with diet. Seventy of the 125 children were located and evaluated in adulthood. Mental problems, including phobias and depression, were reported in 41% of those off diet and 22% of continuers. The 'on diet' group had only 2 reported episodes of transient depression not requiring psychiatric care. The neurologic signs related primarily to increased or decreased muscle tone and deep tendon reflex changes. The group who remained on a phenylalanine-restricted diet had fewer problems overall than the discontinued group (P = 0.02). 

Singh et al. (2014) reported updated recommendations for the nutritional management of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. Their paper was accompanied by an American College of Medical Genetics practice guideline authored by Vockley et al. (2014), which updated phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency diagnosis and management, including the use of sapropterin dihydrochloride to achieve improved metabolic control and/or increased protein tolerance in patients who respond. 

Van Vliet et al. (2022) examined the effects of large neutral amino acid (LNAA) supplementation with and without various levels of dietary phenylalanine (Phe)-restriction on plasma phenylalanine, brain amino acid, and brain monoamine levels in a mouse model of phenylketonuria (BTBR Pah-emu2). LNAA supplementation resulted in higher brain Phe levels compared to mice on a severe Phe-restricted diet but in lower brain Phe levels compared to mice on a semi-Phe-restricted diet. LNAA supplementation resulted in similar brain levels of monoamide compared to mice on a severe Phe-restricted diet but in lower brain levels of monoamide compared to mice on a semi-Phe-restricted diet. Van Vliet et al. (2022) suggested that LNAA treatment could be employed in PKU for treatment of low brain monoamide levels without the addition of a Phe-restricted diet. 

Sapropterin (Tetrahydrobiopterin)-Responsive PKU

At least half of patients with phenylketonuria have a mild clinical phenotype. Muntau et al. (2002) explored the therapeutic efficacy of tetrahydrobiopterin for the treatment of mild phenylketonuria. Tetrahydrobiopterin significantly lowered blood phenylalanine levels in 27 of 31 patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia (10 patients) or mild phenylketonuria (21 patients). Phenylalanine oxidation was significantly enhanced in 23 of these 31 patients. Conversely, none of the 7 patients with classic phenylketonuria had a response to tetrahydrobiopterin. Long-term treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin in 5 children increased daily phenylalanine tolerance, allowing them to discontinue their restricted diets. Mutations connected to tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness were predominantly in the catalytic domain of the PAH protein and were not directly involved in cofactor binding. Muntau et al. (2002) concluded that responsiveness could not consistently be predicted on the basis of genotype, particularly in compound heterozygotes. 

Lassker et al. (2002) reported 2 new patients with tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive PKU who carried missense mutations in the PAH gene. Both patients showed no effect of tetrahydrobiopterin at 7.5 mg/kg/day on plasma phenylalanine levels in the newborn period, and the authors suggested that a normal neonatal tetrahydrobiopterin test does not necessarily exclude tetrahydrobiopterin responsiveness in all such patients. 

Matalon et al. (2004) found that 21 of 36 (58.3%) PKU patients responded favorably to oral tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) supplementation. A single dose of 10 mg/kg resulted in a mean decrease of greater than 30% in blood phenylalanine levels. Patients who responded were found to have mutations in the PAH gene within the catalytic, regulatory, oligomerization, and BH4-binding domains. 

Steinfeld et al. (2004) reported 2 unrelated infants with PKU who responded favorably to daily BH4 supplementation. They no longer needed dietary restriction and showed normal development after 2 years. One of the patients was homozygous for a mild PAH mutation (Y414C; 612349.0017). No side effects were observed. 

Keil et al. (2013) reported the follow-up of 147 patients treated with sapropterin dihydrochloride for up to 12 years: 41.9% had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, 50.7% mild PKU, and 7.4% classic PKU. Median phenylalanine (Phe) tolerance increased 3.9 times with BH4/sapropterin therapy, compared with dietary treatment, and median Phe blood concentrations were within the therapeutic range in all patients. Compared with diet alone, improvement in quality of life was reported in 49.6% of patients, improvement in adherence to diet in 47% of patients, and improvement in adherence to treatment in 63.3% of patients. No severe adverse events were reported. Keil et al. (2013) concluded that their data documented a long-term beneficial effect of orally administered BH4/sapropterin in responsive PKU patients by improving metabolic control, increasing daily tolerance for dietary Phe intake, and for some, by improving dietary adherence and quality of life. 

Waisbren et al. (2021) reported the long-term effects of sapropterin treatment on intellectual functioning and other outcomes in 62 children who started sapropterin before 6 years of age. Intellectual functioning (as measured by the full-scale intelligent quotient (FSIQ)) and growth rates were maintained over a follow-up period of 7 years and stayed in the normal range. Approximately 60% of patients maintained their blood phenylalanine levels in the therapeutic range of 120-360 micromol/L throughout the study. All of the patients had at least one adverse event during the study period; the most common adverse events were upper respiratory tract infections, abdominal pain and vomiting, and diarrhea. 

For more detailed information on genotype/phenotype correlations in tetrahydrobiopterin-responsive PKU, see 612349.

Treatment with Phenylalanine Ammonia Lyase (PAL)

Hoskins et al. (1980) showed that the plant enzyme phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL; EC 4.3.1.5) will survive in the gut long enough to deplete the phenylalanine derived from food protein and so reduce the rise in blood phenylalanine that otherwise occurs after a protein meal. Preliminary studies suggested that it may have a place in the treatment of PKU. 

Sarkissian et al. (1999) described experiments on a mouse model using a different modality for treatment of PKU compatible with better compliance using ancillary PAL to degrade phenylalanine, the harmful nutrient of PKU; in this treatment, PAL acts as a substitute for the enzyme phenylalanine monooxygenase, which is deficient in PKU. PAL, a robust enzyme without need for a cofactor, converts phenylalanine to trans-cinnamic acid, a harmless metabolite. Sarkissian et al. (1999) described (i) an efficient recombinant approach to produce large quantities of PAL enzyme using a construct of the PAL gene from Rhodosporidium toruloides and expressing it in a strain of E. coli; (ii) testing of PAL in orthologous mouse with hyperphenylalaninemia induced by N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) mutation; and (iii) proofs of principle (PAL reduces hyperphenylalaninemia), both pharmacologic (with a clear dose-response effect) and physiologic (protected enteral PAL is significantly effective against hyperphenylalaninemia). They concluded that the appropriate dosage of orally administered PAL, perhaps in combination with a controlled and modestly low protein diet, should effectively control the phenylalanine pool size through its effect on the gastrointestinal tract. These findings opened a new avenue to the treatment of this classic genetic disorder. 

Zori et al. (2019) found that after 1 and 2 years of treatment with subcutaneous pegvaliase (a pegylated PAL derivative) in adults with PKU whose baseline Phe was greater than or equal to 600 micromoles per liter, Phe levels were significantly improved compared to a matched historical cohort treated with sapropterin plus diet and diet alone. Pegvaliase-treated individuals also had diets with significantly higher protein intake. 

Hollander et al. (2022) evaluated subcutaneous pegvaliase dosing in 15 patients with PKU who participated in a pegvaliase clinical trial and 24 PKU patients who were started on pegvaliase after the drug was on the market (post-marketing cohort). The patients in the clinical trial cohort had an average of 4.8 years longer treatment compared to the post-marketing cohort. The patients who were in the clinical trial cohort had a lower average pegvaliase dose compared to the post-marketing cohort and the post-marketing cohort had an inverse correlation with dose change and number of weeks from a response. Hollander et al. (2022) found that the patients tolerated a reduction in pegvaliase dosing over time while still retaining therapeutic efficacy, suggesting that pegvaliase dose required for efficacy may decrease over time in patients with PKU. 

Other Treatments

Stegink et al. (1989) tested the effect of aspartame (N-L-alpha-aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl ester--a widely used dipeptide sweetener) on phenylalanine concentrations in persons heterozygous for PKU. They found moderate elevations in phenylalanine levels above baseline for heterozygotes for PKU (2.3-4.7 micromoles, 30-45 minutes after ingestion of a 12-ounce beverage). 

Liver transplantation is not a usual therapy for PKU because of the usually good results achieved with early dietary restriction and because liver disease is not part of the clinical picture of PKU. Vajro et al. (1993) reported that orthotopic liver transplantation in a 10-year-old boy with PKU and concomitant, unrelated end-stage liver disease cured the PKU. 

Eisensmith and Woo (1996) reviewed the current state of gene therapy for phenylketonuria. Of the 3 basic steps required, 2 have been accomplished: a cDNA clone expressing human phenylalanine hydroxylase and a phenylalanine hydroxylase-deficient animal model have been developed, while vectors for efficient gene transfer in vivo have yet to be developed. Retroviral vectors, while effective in vitro, have a low transduction efficiency in vivo. Similarly, DNA/protein complexes have not been efficiently transduced in vivo. Recombinant adenoviral vectors, although completely successful in the short term, did not persist beyond a few weeks due to an immune response against the adenoviral vector.