Normal blood phenylalanine levels are 58 +/- 15 micromoles/liter in adults, 60 +/- 13 micromoles/liter in teenagers, and 62 +/- 18 micromoles/liter (mean +/- SD) in childhood. In the newborn, the upper limit of normal is 120 micromoles/liter (2 mg/dl) (Scriver et al., 1985; Gregory et al., 1986). In untreated classical PKU, blood levels as high as 2.4 mM/liter can be found. 

Bowden and McArthur (1972) found that phenylpyruvic acid inhibits pyruvate decarboxylase in brain but not in liver. They suggested that this accounts for the defect in formation of myelin and mental retardation in this disease. 

In the liver of a fetus aborted after prenatal DNA diagnosis of PKU, Ledley et al. (1988) found no detectable phenylalanine hydroxylase enzymatic activity or immunoreactive protein, although both were found in control specimens of similar gestational age. Both the size and the amount of phenylalanine hydroxylase mRNA were normal. The findings confirmed the genetic diagnosis of PKU in the fetus and indicated that the mutations affected translation or stability of the protein. 

Tolerance to dietary phenylalanine and therefore the clinical severity of PKU have been presumed to be the consequence of the rate of conversion of phenylalanine into tyrosine. However, in a study of 7 classic PKU patients, van Spronsen et al. (1998) found that although the in vivo hydroxylation of phenylalanine into tyrosine was decreased, there was no significant correlation between the in vivo hydroxylation rates and the tolerances. 

Kaufman (1999) described the derivation of a quantitative model of phenylalanine metabolism in humans. The model was based on the kinetic properties of pure recombinant human PAH and on estimates of the in vivo rates of phenylalanine transamination and protein degradation. Calculated values for the steady-state concentration of blood phenylalanine, rate of clearance of phenylalanine from the blood after an oral load of the amino acid, and dietary tolerance of phenylalanine all agreed with data from normal as well as from phenylketonuric patients and obligate heterozygotes. Kaufman (1999) suggested that these calculated values may help in the decision about the degree of restriction of phenylalanine intake that is necessary to achieve a satisfactory clinical outcome in patients with classic PKU and in those with milder forms of the disease. 

It has been postulated that the significant incidence of learning disabilities in treated patients with PKU may be due, in part, to reduced production of neurotransmitters as a result of deficient tyrosine transport across the neuronal cell membrane. In a study of hypotyrosinemia in a PKU population, Hanley et al. (2000) found that the mean nonfasting plasma tyrosine was 41.1 micromol/L in 99 classic PKU patients, 53.3 micromol/L in 26 mild (atypical) PKU patients, and 66.6 micromol/L in 35 non-PKU mild hyperphenylalaninemia patients. This compared to nonfasting plasma tyrosine levels of 64.0 micromol/L in 102 non-PKU subjects in their hospital biochemistry database, 69.1 micromol/L in 58 volunteers in private office practice, and 64 to 78.8 micromol/L in infants, children, and adolescents in a literature review. The data supported previous findings that plasma tyrosine levels are low in PKU. 

Leuzzi et al. (2000) assessed brain Phe concentration by in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in 10 off-diet PKU patients, aged 15.5 to 30.5 years. An abnormal concentration of brain Phe was detected in all patients, but there was wide interindividual variability of concurrent plasma Phe. In late-detected subjects, brain Phe concentration correlated with clinical phenotype better than did plasma Phe. White-matter alterations were found in all patients. 

Koch et al. (2000) referred to preliminary reports suggesting that the occasional untreated person with PKU with normal intellect has elevated blood phenylalanine but low brain phenylalanine levels, They measured blood phenylalanine levels and used MRI/MRS to measure brain phenylalanine content in 29 individuals with PKU, 4 carriers of phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations, and 5 controls. For each individual with PKU, the authors also noted IQ, mutations, whether or not a restricted diet was followed, and age at diagnosis. Koch et al. (2000) concluded that MRI/MRS measurements of brain phenylalanine content may be of value in recommending appropriate blood phenylalanine concentrations for treatment of adults. 

Weglage et al. (2002) investigated 4 pairs of sibs with classical PKU using in vivo NMR spectroscopy in the course of an oral phenylalanine load (100 mg/kg body weight). Patients' brain phenylalanine concentrations were different in spite of similar blood levels. Interindividual variations of the apparent transport Michaelis constant ranged from 0.10 to 0.84 mmol/L. Sibs with lower values for the apparent transport constant, higher values for the ratio of the maximal transport velocity over the intracerebral consumption rate, and higher concurrent brain phenylalanine levels showed a lower IQ and a higher degree of cerebral white matter abnormalities. Weglage et al. (2002) concluded that blood-brain barrier transport characteristics and the resultant brain phenylalanine levels are causative factors for the individual clinical outcome in PKU. 

To determine whether impairments of cerebral metabolism may play a role in acute phenylalanine neurotoxicity, Pietz et al. (2003) studied 11 adult early-treated PKU patients and 10 healthy controls for changes in concentrations of cerebral metabolites using noninvasive quantitative phosphorus-31 MRS. In adult patients, derived ADP concentration and phosphorylation potential were increased by 11% and 22%, respectively; peak areas of inorganic phosphate and phospholipids were decreased by 22% and 8%, respectively. ADP correlated with concurrent plasma (r = 0.65) and brain (r = 0.55) phenylalanine levels. PKU patients showed slowing of EEG background activity, a sign of impaired brain function, 24 hours after oral phenylalanine challenge. Pietz et al. (2003) concluded that there were subtle abnormalities of cerebral energy metabolism and encouraged more clinical studies on the relationship of imbalances of high energy phosphates and cerebral energy metabolism to acute phenylalanine neurotoxicity. 