Waters et al. (2000) characterized 4 PKU-associated PAH mutations that change an amino acid distant from the enzyme active site. Using 3 complementary in vitro protein expression systems and 3D structural localization, Waters et al. (2000) demonstrated a common mechanism, i.e., PAH protein folding is affected, causing altered oligomerization and accelerated proteolytic degradation, leading to reduced cellular levels of this cytosolic protein. Enzyme-specific activity and kinetic properties are not adversely affected, implying that the only way these mutations reduce enzyme activity within cells in vivo is by producing structural changes which provoke the cell to destroy the aberrant protein. The mutations were chosen because of their associations with a spectrum of in vivo hyperphenylalaninemia among patients. Waters et al. (2000) concluded that their in vitro data suggests that interindividual differences in cellular handling of the mutant but active PAH proteins contributes to the observed variability of phenotypic severity. 

Most PAH missense mutations impair enzyme activity by causing increased protein instability and aggregation. Gjetting et al. (2001) described an alternative mechanism by which some PAH mutations may render phenylalanine hydroxylase defective. They used database searches to identify regions in the N-terminal domain of PAH with homology to the regulatory domain of prephenate dehydratase (PDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in the bacterial phenylalanine biosynthesis pathway. Naturally occurring N-terminal PAH mutations are distributed in a nonrandom pattern and cluster within residues 46-48 (amino acids GAL) and 65-69 (amino acids IESRP), 2 motifs highly conserved in PDH. To examine whether N-terminal PAH mutations affect the ability of PAH to bind phenylalanine at the regulatory domain, wildtype and 5 mutant forms (including G46S, 612349.0055; A47V, 612349.0056; and I65T, 612349.0063) of the N-terminal domain (residues 2-120) of human PAH were expressed as fusion proteins in E. coli. Binding studies showed that the wildtype form of this domain specifically binds phenylalanine, whereas all mutations abolished or significantly reduced this phenylalanine-binding capacity. The data suggested that impairment of phenylalanine-mediated activation of PAH may be an important disease-causing mechanism of some N-terminal PAH mutations. 

Most missense mutations found in PKU result in misfolding of the phenylalanine hydroxylase protein, increased protein turnover, and loss of enzymatic function. Pey et al. (2007) studied the prediction of the energetic impact on PAH native-state stability of 318 PKU-associated missense mutations, using the protein-design algorithm FoldX. For the 80 mutations for which expression analyses had been performed in eukaryotes, in most cases they found substantial overall correlation between the mutational energetic impact and both in vitro residual activities and patient metabolic phenotype. This finding confirmed that the decrease in protein stability is the main molecular pathogenic mechanism in PKU and the determinant for phenotypic outcome. Metabolic phenotypes had been shown to be better predicted than in vitro residual activities, probably because of greater stringency in the phenotyping process. All the remaining 238 PKU missense mutations compiled in the PAH locus knowledgebase (PAHdb) were analyzed, and their phenotypic outcomes were predicted on the basis of the energetic impact provided by FoldX. Residues in exons 7-9 and in interdomain regions within the subunit appeared to play an important structural role and constitute hotspots for destabilization. 

Using recombinant proteins expressed in E. coli, Gersting et al. (2008) characterized 10 BH4-responsive PAH mutations, including arg408 to trp (R408W; 612349.0002) and tyr414 to cys (Y414C; 612349.0017). Residual activity was generally high, but allostery was disturbed in almost all variants, suggesting altered protein conformation. This hypothesis was confirmed by reduced proteolytic stability, impaired tetramer assembly or aggregation, increased hydrophobicity, and accelerated thermal unfolding, which primarily affected the regulatory domain, in most variants. Three-dimensional modeling revealed that the misfolding was communicated throughout the protein. Gersting et al. (2008) concluded that global conformational changes in PAH hinder the molecular motions essential for enzyme function. 