Brumm et al. (2010) reviewed studies of psychiatric symptoms and disorders in patients with PKU. Those with untreated PKU tended to have severe behavioral disturbances, including psychotic disorders, autistic features, hyperactivity, and aggression, as well as self-mutilation. Among early-treated children and adolescents, discontinuation of treatment was associated with attention-deficit disorder and decreased social competence. Children who continued treatment had fewer behavioral problems. However, most tended to be less happy and confident. Even adults who had early treatment had higher rates of depression, anxiety-related disorders, and social introversion compared to the normal population. In general, the severity of problems correlated with the timing and degree of exposure to increased blood levels of phenylalanine. Brumm et al. (2010) stated that mechanisms of psychiatric disorders in PKU most likely result from a combination of neurotransmitter imbalance, myelination defects, and the stress of living with a chronic illness. 

Gentile et al. (2010) reviewed studies of psychosocial aspects of PKU and concluded that even treated individuals have hidden disabilities resulting from poor executive function, decreased mental processing speed, and psychosocial problems. These included difficulties in forming interpersonal relationships, achieving autonomy, attending educational goals, and having healthy emotional development. The most important way to reduce these problems is strict metabolic control throughout life, with particular importance on the first year of life. 

Pilotto et al. (2021) performed neurologic and neuropsychologic testing and brain MRIs in a cohort of 19 adults, aged 30 to 45 years, with early-treated PKU. The median phenylalanine level in this cohort was 873 micromol/l with a range of 57 to 2,100 micromol/l; 14 of the patients reported consuming a phenylalanine-restricted diet and 1 patient was also treated with sapropterin dihydrochloride. The patients had a higher prevalence of neurologic symptoms (hyperreflexia, kinetic tremor, and slowed horizontal saccades) and cognitive and behavioral abnormalities (global cognition and depressive and behavioral symptoms) compared to controls. The patients also had increased atrophy of the putamen and right thalamus on MRI compared to controls. CSF metabolites, which were tested in 10 of the patients, had increased beta-amyloid, total tau, and phosphorylated tau compared to controls. Plasma phenylalanine level in the patients correlated to total number of pathologic cognitive tests, motor-evoked potential latency, and parietal lobe atrophy on brain MRI. Pilotto et al. (2021) concluded that these results support continuous metabolic control of phenylalanine levels in adults with PKU. 